Q: Will you tell me your name and what job you’ve held around nursing, your orientation?
{: .question}

AMN: My name is Annette Mwansa Nkowane. I usually go by my second name -Mwansa. I am Zambian, a nurse, a midwife as well a community health nurse. After I qualified as a registered nurse in Zambia, I worked at different levels of the Zambia health service delivery system, at the provincial, community and district levels. I was involved in communities a lot, working with the traditional birth attendants, community health workers and other community based health care professionals.  When we later moved to the USA, I was able to sit for the State Board exams and started working as a registered nurse in the state of Georgia and later in the state of Illinois. After living in the USA for 8 years, as a family we decided to return to Zambia. By this time my husband Dr Benjamin Nkowane had obtained his post graduate training at Yale University and later worked with the Centres for Disease Control in Atlanta, Georgia.

When we returned to Zambia, I entered the University of Zambia to further my nursing qualifications. During this period, my husband who was lecturer in the Public Health Department, School of Medicine at the University of Zambia had been offered a job in Geneva with the WHO and was among the group that initiated the AIDS program, because in the ’80s, HIV infections were beginning to take hold.

Q: I would like to ask you to tell me when you first heard about Ebola.
{: .question}

AMN: I can’t remember exactly which year when it first happened in Uganda.  The second time was when it happened in West Africa in 2014. By November 2014, it became apparent that this was not going anywhere.  I was attached to the Ebola Technical Group at the WHO Headquarters in Geneva.  We mobilized nurses to participate in the Ebola response, because WHO really cannot employ so many people, we rely on our partners.  There were no standards at that time. For example, one cannot just say a nurse should spend five minutes with an Ebola patient. More details are needed to offer the best option such as, where is this patient located? Has he or she just been admitted, or are they under treatment? How long does it take for a nurse to put on the personal protective equipment-PPE? All those things had to be taken into consideration.  And I think the first statement by WHO on Ebola was in August 2014, four months earlier, and it was already then shocking everyone.

The nursing and midwifery leadership, had certain expectations, and did not understand that WHO is a technical organization. As a technical officer—the focus is on improving nursing and midwifery services in all health disciplines and not to act as lobbyist for the nursing and midwifery profession only. Because of this misconception, the nursing and midwifery community would feel that there was nothing being done in WHO, while inside WHO it was clear what was being done on nursing and midwifery. It is important that the nursing and midwifery leaders understand how WHO functions. In that way everyone could work better to improve the nursing and midwifery profession as a whole. For example, instead of pushing for one nurse in the organization there is need to encourage more nurses and midwives to join WHO in all its priority programs. Then they would have a better chance of influencing health strategies and policies affecting nursing and midwifery. One person cannot do it by themselves. That’s what I think.

Q: So here you are, five years later, actually in two countries, talking to nurses and midwives at all levels, from Ministry of Health to nurses in the Ebola treatment unit. What have you been thinking about and reflecting on?
{: .question}

AMN: You know, nursing is a hands-on profession, and one never loses it, and somehow, even when I was in Geneva I was thinking, oh, I miss holding a baby, or I miss being at the bedside. But, of course, the roles evolve as one progresses professionally. This opportunity here for me is like being closer to what I began to do as a nurse, being in touch with people, because in nursing, one has to be a people person. Relating to people on common ground, and listening to what they go through, is really very emotional for me, it’s like going full circle, [laughs] as you are saying. Now we are back on the ground. Let’s see what we can do to help nurses, with that knowledge. When I’m talking to nurses and nurse leaders, I’m hearing them talk about protocols, those protocols we developed in Geneva, that they were being used and were so useful for them.

But I also feel sad because protocols only do not help much. It’s really how nurses respond and the support they get. Protocols will not heal the emotional wounds.  How do we make sure that, nurses on the frontline come out with less scars and continue serving? I see the emotions in the nurses we are talking to. They are willing to continue to serve as nurses, but are we supporting them enough for them to continue doing their work effectively? That is a question that I have to answer, and see how else we can mobilize resources in terms of support and their own governments to continue supporting them.

Q: So what have you identified as some major challenges, and what would you want to do next?
{: .question}

AMN: There is need to look at nurses as persons, as individuals, because they have emotions, they have families. For us to keep them motivated, what policies can be put in place that really address their personal aspects? For example, we have to look at how they were working. Some of them worked so hard, they never rested. What policies can be put in place to ensure that they have some rest? They never saw their families. Is there a way that they can continue being in touch with their families? They shed tears, when they talk about having to be away from their families. Some of them had small children, like two to four years old. They never saw them in a long time. That is traumatic for a mother, not to be with their child. How else can our governments and organizations help to ensure such family interaction happen, while even controlling the risk of infection? There has to be something that really heals the wounds, or helps them to keep in touch with their families so that they are less stressed, less worried about what is happening at home. Although personal protection from infection succeeded, it’s that emotional part that needs to be resolved through appropriate policies and support.

There is also the issue of management.  Most of these nurses were really running the Ebola units. Management skills comes with a lot of aspects: issues of communication; conflict management; role definitions; assertiveness; being a leader. A program that addresses leadership and management skills for nurses would be important. Training shouldn’t happen once or as a one-off thing, it should be embedded in an in-service program with nurses enrolled from various levels. We always think that management and leadership is only necessary at a higher level. It’s not only at higher level; it should be at every level of nursing to some extent.

Information gathering on Ebola is also very important. Nurses are supposed to record accurately, get information, relate it to others so that they know what is happening and how to respond. People say, “Oh, it’s research. It should not be for nurses.”  But when a nurse sees something at the center, if it is recorded and reported quickly, cases of Ebola would be identified earlier. So these aspects in the training curriculum should be strengthened.

Lastly there are issues of advocacy, to sustain the momentum, especially with government. The Ebola outbreak took place, they resolved it, they moved on. But nurses and leaders in nursing associations, in the government institutions can continue with the advocacy at that level, to keep the momentum and remind populations that Ebola outbreak can happen again. They should make sure that disaster, health emergency preparedness is instituted. If they can work on that, then they will be better prepared to respond next time should there be another Ebola crisis.
