Q: It’s nice here, being in Sierra Leone. [laughs] As you heard, we would like you to talk about your experiences in Ebola, and just open up and let us know. It’s something we want to learn from you. I’ll ask you some questions, and then you can tell me—feel free. And it’s being recorded, and so that we don’t miss out anything. When did the outbreak begin?

SM: It was 2014. And we all know it started in Kailahun District, precisely from Koindu. It moved, then, to Kenema, Madisalai, a co-district, then to there around Kenema. Those are the initial areas where we had the outbreak. I was the President of Sierra Leone Nurses Association at the time of the Ebola outbreak. Honestly, it was a challenge for all. And for us as an association, it was also devastating, seeing your colleagues who are service providers succumb to that as a result of their services being provided.

Q: Okay. Well, I just want a little bit about your life history. You know, we all begin from somewhere. [laughs] It’s not because Ebola was there, then it happened, but just a little bit about your life, your family, your education, and why you decided to become a nurse.

SM:  I originally came from a humble background, from Bo, which is like the second city, not within the township of Bo but one of the chiefdoms in Bo District. I was born in a village called Opasama [phonetic], and from a mom by the name of Jeneba [phonetic] Margao and a dad by the name of Mami [phonetic] Margao, a polygamist home with several children. About four wives, several children. From my mom’s side, we are about six in number: three males and then four females. I started my schooling in that same village, Opasama. I did up to class four, [unclear] my older brother, but I do my process in Gomban [phonetic] Sowa, as Pujehun District.

I was there until I started on my Selective Entrance, which is now called in this country as National Primary School. I start on my entrance there. And I went to a government-subsidized school Jemin [phonetic]. I was there. Then the war broke off, 1991. Definitely that was not good for us. We have to move from Jemin School. I went to St. Edward’s Secondary School, Bo. There I sat for my GCO Level, and then later I started teaching at that same school as a volunteer in the school there, because my father was in the camp, in the—

Q: Army?

SM: In a displaced camp in Bo. I had to volunteer at the school to raise money. In 1999, I entered the National School of Nursing to do my RN [Registered Nurse]. And there I rose to the point of getting the student chino president, in the year 2001-2002, academic year. That was my final year at the school. I left….

Q: To do volunteer work.

SM: Do volunteer work for the Association. I was elected Secretary General of the Association in 2004, position I held for up to almost four years. There was an election. I never vied again, because I wanted to pursue other causes. The President called me to come and assist her as the Vice President.

Q: Okay, so this is the position you are holding.

SM: When the President is not around, the Vice President has to take over. When her time came to an end was elected as the official President—

Q: So who are your mentors in this?

SM: In the sense of my family, mine, I’m also married with three children. But my mentor within the profession, literally, I have Patricia Va [phonetic]. Yes, the President of the Association, and virtually they did mentor me somehow, because at the beginning it’s a position where you are not paid. It’s a volunteer position, and so most times, people were not willing to even act, because, one, you are not victimized at national level, and simple fear.

Q: So you have a good heart. [laughs]

SM: —Yes and I really suffered a lot. Because, you know, in an association you are a middleman between the employers and the employees of the nursing force. You have to be firm in making decisions on behalf of the employees. And most of the time, you know, employers want people who are flexible at times on issues, and so if you are there to bring up challenging issue, most of them, they see you as a bad person. But your role is there to defend, and so I continued defending my colleagues until my time of office ends in May 2019.

Q: What was the first time you got engaged in the Ebola outbreak, or how did you get engaged? And what was it like to take care of the patients, or the clients?

SM: Initially, I was involved in the training. I worked with the Directorate of Nursing and Midwifery Services then, and I also had to work with other parastaters [phonetic] who are also recruiting nurses to work during the Ebola [outbreak]. The outbreak was of course devastating to us as a country, because virtually there was nothing there in the beginning to help fight the disease. We’re talking about four to five functioning ambulances, the whole country. We’re talking about less knowledge because we never had an outbreak, even though we’ve got hemorrhagic fever in this country, the Lhasa fever, but it was nowhere as massive as Ebola; it was nowhere as deadly as Ebola. And so therefore it came to us, as a country, in the form of surprise. The country was not prepared, and so as an organization you are not prepared for that.

After the outbreak colleagues started succumbing to it, and they would have to raise up an alarm with the government. Then we started losing our colleagues, so therefore certain issues, we took care of, like the equipment to work with. These are very key.

Q: The equipment.

SM: The equipment, because for Kenema, our colleagues were using PPE [personal protective equipment]. They didn’t use it off and discard them. Some of them had to keep them, take them to their home, bring it back, so that others cannot use them. Imagine taking that type of infected material to your home, but it’s why a lot of colleagues lose not only themselves as service providers, but all of their families also went down. Because of those things, we had to raise the issue with the government, as an association. We sat with the president and raised some issues in terms of supplying all the necessary materials, and then also giving us an allowance to help motivate colleagues to go there. And allowances were paid based on the level of exposure, and so that’s how it was—

Q: How did you come to protect yourself? You said they didn’t have resources in the beginning, and how was that message delivered to the people who are in direct contact?

SM: We visited every district, not once, not twice, but several times, all the districts in this country. And then, due to the escalation, the government had to put Ebola as an emergency, [and the] WHO [World Health Organization] and everyone partnered. We had a lot of support coming into the country. Most of it was training, because we knew very well that we didn’t have the knowledge we needed for Ebola. That caused numerous deaths of our colleagues. But after that training, there was now a drastic reduction in both deaths of service providers within the treatment center, to the bigger team. And so, for us, the training was very important. We had to ensure that as an association we not only work with not only the government but other partners who were in the country to help us in the fight against Ebola.

Q: What do you think the composition of health workers—how was it organized, you know, the types? Were there more women? Were there more men?

SM: Well, for nursing, we all are very aware nursing is something like ninety percent to ninety-five percent women. Even when it comes to your support staff at these treatment centers, more women were also employed to ensure that we all fight the deadly virus in our country.

Q: There must have been some losses among the staff because of Ebola. How did you deal with that? How did you help colleagues overcome that?

SM: As an organization, several times when colleagues were quarantined we were able to supply their materials and food items to their homes [phonetic]. For some of them who lost their lives,  we were able to provide some material things.

Q: In terms of safety, how did you come to protect yourself? You said they didn’t have resources in the beginning, and how was that message delivered to the people who are in direct contact?

SM: We visited every district, not once, not twice, but several times, all the districts in this country. And then, due to the escalation, the government had to put Ebola as an emergency, [and the] WHO [World Health Organization] came and everyone partnered. So we have a lot of support coming into the country. Most of it was training, because we knew very well that we didn’t have the knowledge we needed for Ebola. That caused numerous deaths in our colleagues. But after that training, there was a drastic reduction in deaths of service providers within the treatment center.

Q: What do you think the composition of health workers—how was it organized, you know, the types? Were there more women? Were there more men?

SM: Well, for nursing, we all are very aware nursing is something like ninety percent to ninety-five percent women. Even when it comes to your support staff at these treatment centers, more women were also employed.

Q: What stands out for you in terms of what you learned? You know, because there are old habits, new habits. What stands out?

SM: Our healthcare system in the country, as a country. Things were not there. And the training. Training, training, training. Most of us are never trained in some of those basic things, in terms of infection prevention and control. After Ebola, the Ministry of Health ensured that every health provider has been trained not once, not twice, some of them thrice in infection prevention and control. But, like, as I said, this was lacking at the initial phase of the outbreak.

Q: How was your interaction and communication between you and the doctors, the nursing professional?

SM: I don’t know about other countries but, like, for Sierra Leone, the doctors weren’t always best for them. Nurses would do all the dirty jobs.

Q: We want to learn from this situation. What were the most important things that you learned, that the health workers should be able to remember?

SM: Okay. First, you always have to be knowledgeable enough. That was one. And then also teamwork was also necessary in terms of preventing Ebola. Teamwork was key. Community participation was also very important, because we, as health workers and individuals, really need the involvement of community people, in terms of the bylaws that were done by this community of people, together with government authorities. Let’s say law enforcement also was very key in fighting off Ebola in this country.

Q: What do you mean by that?

SM: One, there was a law issued: don’t touch a sick person. You should not touch a dead body. Those things were enforced. Initial phase, people never listened. They are washing the body without a tool. They don’t have gloves. They use their bare hands. You have to wash that person and wrap that person for burial. Imagine. And one knew very well once the individual was dead from Ebola [that] the body itself was going to be billions of the virus encapsulated. The mere touch of it gets yourself infected. In one village, people were even using the water to drink. So that village, almost all of them died. To me, that’s—we want in Africa the law, the enforcement of the law, the community involvement through sensitization, using different media. It was very helpful.

Community ambassadors were trained. They were sensitized, using posters, using radio, some of them using other means within the community, just to ensure that they are also aware of Ebola to make for them also to see the need. That’s to protect themselves as a community. Because even the institution of communion, greetings after service, all these things were put to a stop by the government, by the religious council.

Q: How about the community, and the global community, in terms of preparedness?

SM: Well, to me, the international community, my own advice to them is, one, since most of the African countries did not regain their economy [phonetic], they have to ensure to continue engaging the government on those issues, because when it affects one nation, there’s tendency to spread to the other nations. That’s part of what WHO is doing in Sierra Leone, what ICAP [International Center for AIDS Care and Treatment Programs] is doing. They’re coming over, supporting people in training, building the capacity. They also need to be reminding governments. They have to also strengthen secondary institutions. Because most of them concentrate on the primary preventative aspect. The curative aspect, the people there don’t have the requisite knowledge in terms of prevention, so they really need to strengthen those. And they also need to strengthen their engagements with the government, because that is very key.

Q: What are you most proud of, after going through this—

SM: Ebola. One thing, we were able as a country—I’m proud that we are able as a country, together with partners, to win over Ebola. You cannot lead in silence. You need support. You have to work with others. No one person can do it alone. And then, in terms of outbreak, my plea with the international partners, not to wait until after people have succumbed to death, before they come in. And they should, because they knew about Ebola in other countries. They knew it’s a devastating condition. But they left us for some time. So I think early intervention, if a disease, they know that it has caused massive destruction or massive loss of death in other countries, once you hear that this one has occurred in a country, I think the international partners need to get in quick to see how best they can—instead of relying on the existing government, when they know very well the capacity is not there to be able to fight that disease. That should be something they also need to look into as international partners: early intervention in an outbreak, diseases that have occurred in other countries that have caused massive, massive deaths.

Q: At what point in time was there a turning in terms of the control of the virus? The virus reached a peak, and happened when there was a turnaround that cases are going down?

SM: There was a turning point within the outbreak in terms of education. That was very key, because the awareness was high, in terms of infection prevention and control. They also had massive partners convening. Because of that, I think there was a reversing. Awareness was very, very high. And because awareness was high, there was a reversal.

Q: What has changed you, what has impacted you most, and made you better, or not a better person, [laughs] after Ebola?

SM: Yes, one thing I learned from Ebola, which I believe has helped me a lot, was teamwork. Teamwork was really nice. That’s one good aspect of it. And the other one, it also helped build my capacity, in terms of leadership. I interacted with several other authorities, both local and international, which also helped. And then, thirdly, my colleagues, also, were able to have the requisite experience in terms of care in our country.
