DGK: I got involved through the Ministry of Health in the Liberian Board for Nursing & Midwifery. We were contacted that Ebola is on the rampage. What can we do as regulators? My boss, Miss Cecelia Morris said we are educated nurses
\f1 ,
\f0  and to practice and train the midwives and other nurses. The quality of care could prevent Ebola. The World Health Organization assigned us to be trainers during Ebola.  After that training, we were able to roll down the training to nurses and midwives in the fifteen counties in Liberia.\
Q: What were you using to train?  What guidance were you basing your training on?
\f1 \

\f0 DGK: We were basing our training specifically on IPC, infection prevention and control. So we taught on PPE [personal protective equipment]. We taught on how to fix [phonetic] chlorine solution, how to disinfect the infected material or equipment and supply that were being used by nurses, how to get rid of contaminated material. Those were training that were provided for our nurses, basically, especially for midwivesfe. The enhanced PPE: when you are going into the delivery ward, you need to dress in your complete
\f1 ,
\f0  enhanced PPE in order to face your client. And they were trained that when there is no PPE you should not take the risk. You have to protect yourself before protecting another person during the Ebola, because you cannot expose yourself. If you expose yourself, you wouldn\'92t be able to provide the care to the client.\
Ebola was very devastating. Nurses died [phonetic]. You could see people were leaving from here, going home, dead bodies upon dead bodies. Dead bodies. And nurses were not given dignified burial.
\f1 \

\f0 Q: What do you mean?
\f1 \

\f0 DGK: They are buried there in a mass grave, whereas doctors were given specific preference to be buried to where their relative can identify their grave. But it was not done in nurses\'92 case.\
Q: So what you are saying is that doctors were buried in single graves, while nurses were put in mass\'97
\f1 \

\f0 DGK: Some doctors were buried in single graves, while nurses were buried in a mass grave.
\f1 \

\f0 Q: Did you witness any of those burials?
\f1 \

\f0 DGK: No. But no matter what, we look together as a team to keep the profession moving. They say, \'93Keep safe, keep saving. Keep safe and keep saving.\'94 The dead are already gone. Ebola has two symptoms: the dry symptoms and the wet symptoms. So once you die, they spray you with chlorine, so you don\'92t come in contact with the fluid. Today, some people cannot even identify their loved ones\'92 graves.\
Q: So how was that, dealing with that in the family?
\f1 \

\f0 DGK: Oh, it was very bad. Families grieve. Families cry. Korto even called me many for many days.  With my nursing background, I said, \'93No, Korto, that\'92s the aftermath of the Ebola. It can even get you blind. It gets you confused. But with time, you will heal.\'94
\f1 \

\f0 Q: And what do you think of the old habits that have gone and the new policies that have been adapted since Ebola?\
DGK: During the outbreak, policies were not available. Policies were not given to nurses. They did not know where to go, how to channel their grievances. But now, at certain level, policies are there. The IPC policy, I participated in the dissemination that was helped by WHO. Or the policy is there, but are there monitoring systems? No. Now, if we just leave from here to go to one health facility, you will see there will be handwashing bucket but no water, no soap. Are we going back to the same old thing? We will get back there. If there is a monitoring system in place, quality assurance, people ensuring that handwashing, IPC policies are being implemented, I think the spread of infection will reduce to a greater extent. Ebola opened our eyes. It taught us how to take care of ourselves, how to encounter strangers, how to deal with people. It provided a vast opportunity to just read and be enlightened with new knowledge and skills.
\f1 \
}
