Q: Where were you working during the Ebola crisis? How did you become a nurse?\
EKL: I was working for the Human Resource Department at the Attendance Monitoring Unit, Bureau Unit. A friend told me that there was a school offering nursing school almost for free and would also give you lodging. I enrolled to do SRN [State Registered Nurse] in 1987. When I graduated in 1989, I was posted to the Ola During Children\'92s Hospital, and I went for midwifery training.\
After the midwifery, I was reposted to Children\'92s Hospital, and I brought my son to be with me. We relocated to Kenema, and that was when the Rebel War became intensified around the surroundings of Kenema and even in Kenema. By then, life was not really easy. Seeing the people displaced that came back. All my mother\'92s family members were staying with us in the same house, so the meager resources we were getting were not enough to take care of the people around us. We had to make do with whatever was available.\
I was working in Kenema Government Hospital and was assigned to one of the wards that the wounded soldiers were admitted to. It was really stressful because every day they would bring somebody that had been injured, or somebody that had been killed in the war.\
Q: When did you learn about Ebola, and what was your experience?\
EKL: I think Ebola came in March 2013 or so, and I went on a monitoring tour in Kenema. That was when I heard that a fever was killing people in Kailahun, and we thought it was Lhasa, it will pass. When I came back to Freetown, I heard the news that it wasn\'92t Lhasa, it was Ebola. But before it was declared Ebola, we gave it all sorts of names. We knew the Ministry was preparing for some kind of epidemic. But health workers were thinking, it\'92s fever, it\'92s headache, and other complications of malaria, so maybe it\'92s malaria. Nobody thought it was its own thing.\
The first case came from Kailahun to Kenema, where many health workers had been infected and some had died. In Kenema, I got involved with Ebola when one of the health workers came to the office for an inter-district transfer. He wanted an annual leave, because he thought it was time. I told him, \'93You know, they say it\'92s Ebola, so can you please stand off my table so that we can talk? You don\'92t need to be so close to me.\'94 And he said, \'93Sister, I\'92m not from where the Ebola is.\'94 I said, \'93I know, but we have to start to keep precaution and other things.\'94\
He laughed and left for Cameroon. Then the message came that they were looking for him, that he was one of the suspects they are looking for. He was captured in Cameroon and taken back to Kenema, into the ETU [Ebola Treatment Unit]. We had been thinking that Ebola was far off. Then we knew that Ebola could easily come to Freetown.\
The news about colleagues falling down with Ebola, getting ill, came. Many nurses had died. Even in Kenema, the population was rejecting health workers because they were thought to be lying. They were accused of saying \'93it\'92s Ebola,\'94 but when people came for treatment, they would inject them and make them die. The health workers started leaving the workplace because of the stigmas and everything attached to them.\
Q: What was the proudest thing you did? You know, if you look back and say, oh, but even in this confusion I did something.\
EKL: The proudest thing I did was participating in the training. When we were developing the models for treatment, people from WHO would insist that we not touch the patient, that you should keep an arm\'92s-length distance between you and the patient. I said, \'93Then why are we bringing them into hospitals? Because if we are not going to touch them and we are protecting ourselves, the one thing that is always critical in nursing care is that in nursing you touch. We should devise a way so that even if you touch you are protected.\'94\
There is no human who is going to come close to the other who will not touch, and we had the culture of touching. That was how we changed most of the protocols to adapt to our cultural settings, where at least you will not go and see a patient struggling and not help. At least you will take water and give it to the person to drink, and not leave the person to say, \'93Get up and take water,\'94 because if you are really sick you will not even get up to take water.  With us there was someone who would take it and give it to you to drink.\
We had to cry out for nurses to say, \'93Listen, this is not right. Even the protective gear isn\'92t enough.\'94 They were listening to me, to us, even during the lockdown. We participated in the lockdown, we visited people and assisted. Those are the things we are proud of that we did as a country. At least we joined hands to fight Ebola.\
Q: So what can you tell us in terms of what you\'92ve experienced? What lessons have you learned, and what advice can you give if there\'92s another outbreak? How do you think we should be ready for that?\
EKL: We need to strengthen the health system, but even the strengthening that Sierra Leone did was not enough, because when you strengthen the health system, for most of our colleagues or most of us working,\'85we don\'92t have the equipment and the facility to work in. And working in this part of the country as a nurse is the most deplorable [phonetic] profession in healthcare that you can go into, because nursing can be the least recognized profession in healthcare in Sierra Leone now.}
