Q: Can you tell me about your particular role in how you looked at the training of nurses?\
JFS: When the numbers of infected cases started increasing, Dr. Khan, together with Tulane University and Metabiota, brought training to Kenema Government Hospital for all medical superintendents and matrons all over the country. We did the training for two days. But my boss, she was a bit older than me, the senior head nurse in charge, said, \'93No, no, Dr. Khan, I am a bit older, Josephine is a bit younger than me. Let her go and do the training.\'94 That\'92s how she pushed me into it now, but because it\'92s my job, I am a nurse, and this is a new disease that has shown face in Sierra Leone, the curiosity made me want to know more. I decided to go for the training.\
Q: What about the other nurses?\
JFS: Yes, volunteer nurses came onboard. I had twenty-one of them initially. I still have their names in my computer, the twenty-one nurses who volunteered, and they were not on salary.\
Q: Volunteer nurses. You volunteered. You got other nurses to volunteer to do this.\
JFS: Well, I was on salary, but the government was not paying us extra for what we were doing. Well, the same volunteers, some of them became infected, and started dying like this, [snaps] dying, dying, dying. Before we could say one week, two weeks, three weeks, one month, we\'92ve lost about eight of them.\
Q: Eight of them.\
JFS: And so it was scary. And my own people started calling me from Freetown. Leave that environment. Leave the environment. Nurses have started dying. What are you doing there? Leave this environment. And once I did, I switched my number so that l would not receive calls from anybody, because the passion\'97when you go to the units, before you enter the units, you hear patients crying, \'93Nurse, nurse, water, water, water,\'94 calling for water, and so that sound was the one that really moved me. I said, if we don\'92t go and give them water, who will go and give them water? So I started wearing PPE. I said come, let\'92s wear PPE, and that was the time now I started wearing PPE. Take the nurses together. We go in. We give them water. We mix ORS [oral rehydration salts] in containers, put them in the ward, encourage them to drink. You meet people dying, more than fifteen, sixteen, seventeen. Sometimes I don\'92t like to recall. It was terrible by day, you know?\
WHO was on the ground, but they were not really active. They would just come take photos, go for EOC [environment of care] meetings. That was the time I refused to go to an EOC meeting. I said I will not go to an EOC meeting to explain how many people have died. Other people are still suffering over there.\
It was like that, until when Dr. Khan now became infected, and he came to the hospital in the morning and said, \'93Josephine, I\'92m not well. I\'92m not well. I\'92m not feeling myself. So please make sure you take care of those that are here for now, the patients that are in the ward.\'94 And then he called one of our nurses, Tamba, asking to have treatment at home. Tamba took some drugs, malaria treatment, and went to give him treatment. But the day after they collected the sample, immediately somebody called me from the lab to say, \'93Oh, my sister, Dr. Khan has been proven positive.\'94 I said, \'93What? Dr. Khan positive?\'94 She said, \'93Yes, but we have decided to take him to Kailahun.\'94 I said, \'93Why to Kailahun? Can\'92t we manage him here?\'94 They said, \'93No. The entire team\'97Metabiota, Tulane University\'97they have decided\'97\'94 By then, MSF [M\'e9decins Sans Fronti\'e8res] had established their own Ebola center in Kailahun district, and we were in Kenema.\
They took Dr. Khan to Kailahun. They took him on Wednesday evening. In the morning hours, we sent some nurses there with jelly, coconut jelly. You know jelly? Coconuts, the younger coconut, you know, it has a lot of fruit inside. We call it jelly, it was a supplement we used to give. You know, we just used to give an antibiotic, but for Dr. Kahn we added fluid. We opened two IV lines, set up a drip, and gave the coconut jelly water. The three first survivors from our unit survived with the jelly water, and so it was now part of what we do. We brought some of this jelly and then had two nurses bring the jelly water for Dr. Khan in Kailahun. That was a Thursday. Friday, I went there to see him.\
I went to the unit, the MSF Ebola treatment center. I went there, and they made provision for me to go to the visitors\'92 area. He was sitting in a rubber chair, and the IV fluid was hung on him. The drip was turning. Immediately, he saw me, he started crying. He started crying, and tears were coming from his eyes. And I said, \'93Doctor, it\'92s okay. Dr. Khan, it is well. Don\'92t cry, doctor. Don\'92t cry.\'94 And I also started crying. Then the white lady that was there, MSF, the white doctor said, \'93No, don\'92t cry. If he\'92s crying, you are crying, so it\'92s okay, now you\'92ve said greetings, you can go now.\'94 And so I left. I left on Friday. Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and then he passed away.\
[pause] After his death , it was so hard\'97this was somebody that had been giving us courage, somebody that had been talking to us, you know? And then he lost his life. I am just a nurse. If that man has died with all the expertise in community, hospital protocol, hemorrhagic fevers, he\'92s the only expert, and now he\'92s dead.\
I said, I\'92m going to leave this job. I\'92m going home. I will no longer work here. I\'92m going home. I went home crying. I cried for the rest of the day. Then, at night again they called me. \'93Matron, Matron, Nurse So-so is dead.\'94 \'93I know that nurse. I know that nurse,\'94 I said. \'93What can I do?\'94 You know? And I said I will not go there, but when they called me, I went there again. I went there.\
Q: How did you think about explaining this to the community? Were nurses active in teaching the community about what Ebola was, or how to prevent it, or come in for treatment?\
JFS: When the thing started creating serious alarm, I was mainly in the management treatment center, and the social mobilization team, those are the nurses and other health workers, CHOs [community health officers], they used to go out and do sensitization. But the community people were not convinced about Ebola, initially. In fact, one time a mad woman came to the marketplace and started shouting, \'93There\'92s no Ebola! There\'92s no Ebola! These nurses and health workers are liars! I am a nurse!\'94 And she started saying that she\'92s a nurse. \'93It\'92s just cannibalism. I am a nurse. I am a nurse. There is no Ebola. It is just cannibalism they want to do. It is just cannibalism they want to do.\'94 And the whole market went into chaos, and they say, \'93Oh, you are talking it. We are saying it, that there is no Ebola. A nurse is confessing! Witchcraft! Witchcraft!\'94\
And so the whole village converged to go and burn the hospital, the Kenema Government Hospital. When they came there, we are storming off, we are hiding, finding place to hide ourselves. They said they want to burn down the hospital. They want to kill every nurse\'97they were saying, \'93You kill one nurse, we give you one thousand. You kill one\'97\'94 If anybody kills one nurse, they will give that person one thousand, because we are lying that Ebola is real, and Ebola\'97somebody has confessed from our group that there is no Ebola. The police, the military now came and dispersed them. They used teargas. It was terrifying.\
Q: So what would you do differently? What would you want to do if you were given the power to make new policy? What would you want nurses to do?\
JFS: I would start with the policymakers and their failure to recognize what the nurses have done.\
If those that are up there can really do some form of capacity-building for our nurses. It\'92s only now that nurses have started getting masters, first degree. Initially in Sierra Leone it was just nursing assistants, community health nurses, RN [registered nurse], and that\'92s the end. And that\'92s the end. Midwifery -- not everyone will go for midwifery -- and that\'92s the end. But if you have that capacity, if they can try to build up a new curriculum, improving the nursing standard, you understand, that will help us.\
Because of my training I knew what hemorrhagic fevers meant. That\'92s why I took my own money to make a scrub for myself, to buy boots for myself, to cut my hair, because my hair was long, in dreads. I don\'92t want to infect myself going into the Ebola units. Sometimes I was in an Ebola treatment center for one hour, and I didn\'92t know what I would contact, so I decided, let me cut my hair. I called the barber and my hair was cut. I did it because the knowledge is there, that\'92s why. That\'92s wanted. If we can improve, build on our capacity, nurses in this country, that\'92s when we can help for any subsequent outbreak.\
And for we nurses, we should not just say, \'93I\'92ve done my certificate. I think I\'92m okay.\'94 If you have the will, you say, \'93No, I\'92m going to improve myself.\'94 I started nursing as a nursing aide, nursing assistant, and I\'92ve gone to this level now with a Master\'92s in Public Health, because I have the determination. I want to go forward. I want to learn more. I want to know more. I want to know, you know? So for the nurses, now, let them also have that initiative and say now, \'93Let me try to develop myself.\'94\
The other thing is for policy makers. Let\'92s say somebody has done something good, to see just a tap on your back. Like me, with all what I went through, nobody recognized me in Sierra Leone. The government didn\'92t recognize me. My senior authorities, nobody recognized me. Instead, the boss\'97and I\'92m going to say it, and it\'92s on tape, and I am saying it. I told Dr. Shephard, \'93With all what I did, sacrificing myself and my family, after that, the then-outgoing Chief Nursing Officer, instead of giving me a tap on my back to say, \'91Josephine, thank you for what you have done,\'92 she took me from where I was and sent me to the most remote area Kailahun District. I had to walk on foot. I had to bike to go to where I am supposed to work.\
Instead of her just saying, \'93Okay, you\'92ve done more than what we are expecting, now you can go to Freetown, now you can go to a better facility,\'94 she took me to the most remote facility. And I suffered there a lot.\'94 [crying] Our elders, those ahead of us, they should recognize us. As nurses, we are doing a great job, but we are not recognized. We are not recognized. We are not recognized. We are not recognized. Not a single recognition was given to me. It was only when The New York Times came and did a story with me, and then I had also some few guys came from Diaspora Focus [phonetic]\'97I came with this purposely to show you. [shuffling papers] }
