Q: Can you talk about when you first moved from your work as a staff nurse at JFK into the Ebola Treatment Unit? Can you go back in time to the first few days that you were there and talk about that?\
JWK: It was so traumatic. It was so traumatic. My experience as a staff nurse was completely different than in the ETU [Ebola Treatment Unit] because in the ETU, everyone was afraid. Everything was traumatizing. You would be on duty. You\'92d be at the triage, the screening area, screening patients, and you would see a friend, another nurse come in, infected and helpless. Because if you see your friend infected, the next thing that will come to your mind is, \'93Who\'92s next? Could it have been me?\'94\
I always told people I really don\'92t know what took me into work at the ETU. This is my profession. This is my calling. I must go and serve.\
Another day I can never forget was when our late doctor, Dr. Abraham Bobo, went into the ETU.  He took off his rings. He told us, he said, \'93Tell my wife to be strong.\'94 He said, \'93Tell my wife to be strong.\'94 This is a person who always used to mentor us, give us advice, telling us, \'93Ah, you guys need to take precaution.\'94 I mean, seeing him get infected and into the ETU, that was so horrible for us.\
One of my worst experiences was when we had this mother come in. She came with four babies, and the five of them died in sequence. When her last child was dying, I remember her words to me clearly, \'93I\'92m helpless, and how can I help you?\'94 I was the nurse\'97and it was my patient saying this. She\'92s just going to die, and now my hands will go out empty.\
Q: How was the nurse\'92s role different from the doctor\'92s role?\
JWK: If you\'92re looking at caring for a patient, everything lies in the hands of nurses.  Ebola stopped first, because number one, God decided to stop the pestilence he put on us. And two, the force from the nursing work, from the nursing and midwife workforce. Because if it were only doctors we were depending on to go into ETU, trust me, we\'92d still have Ebola. But the nursing and midwifery workforce, they were the heroes and heroines who fought Ebola.\
Q: Any time along the way, did you feel silenced from telling your story? Or did you feel like you could talk about what had happened, and your experience as a nurse?\
JWK: Sometimes I just don\'92t want to tell people I was in the Ebola fight. If you start to talk up your story it brings up\'97it will bring up fear, which is good so people will start to take the necessary precautions. So sometimes I really want to talk about it because it reminds us not to forget that we were hit, and we can still be hit again in the future. All we need is a proper system, monitoring, evaluation. We must be able to track. We know this. And the sad thing about Ebola, the signs and symptoms are not directly fixed to a specific illness. Malaria is a prevalent illness and carries all Ebola symptoms. So, we just have to ask questions. Have you traveled in recent times? Did you attend any burial of any unusual death? We need to ask these questions.\
Q: What helped you to keep going?\
JWK: We had a team built up. We already had this working relationship. It\'92s like, I need to watch your back. You need to watch my back. Because [if] one man goes down, everyone goes down. It was a team effort. That kept me going, kept me encouraged. That was the resilient force that we had that kept us going.\
And we can only have it when the health ministry enforces action and gives strength to our Ebola nurses. They need to recognize that we nurses are the arm behind a good health system and understand that nurses need to be prioritized in this country. A nursing force needs to be strong. If you go to other countries, the people prioritize the nurses. Because we spent more time in all our efforts behind patient care than a doctor. A doctor comes and they prescribe and he or she goes. But if I\'92m not there too, whatever you prescribe, your prescription won\'92t be carried out. If you look at prescription and care, like sixty percent of the work is left with nursing and midwifery. So, all we need to do is to put in more time, provide those requisite materials for the nurses to work with.\
I hope that we could have specialized nursing practices in Liberia. If I want to be a pediatric nurse, I\'92d be able to specialize in pediatrics. If I want to be an OB/GYN nurse, I can specialize. I have high interest in being a nutritionist, but there is no school here that offers nutrition. I don\'92t even think we have ten persons who are nutritionists in Liberia. I don\'92t really know if we have some. I would like us to have nursing within all areas. It gives us more strength to spread our wings.}
