Q: Tell me more about yourself. What is your professional background, and what are you doing now, where you\'92re working?\
KSB: I\'92m a BSc [Bachelor of Science] nurse. Now, I\'92m working with the Ministry of Health [& Social Welfare] in the health promotion division. I\'92m a health promotion officer, and I engage in community activities and creating awareness.\
At that time, there was so much denial about Ebola.  People couldn\'92t believe that Ebola could kill and people can survive from Ebola.  I\'92m one of those that survived Ebola. I told my story to people, with community engagement, so they could understand. People started to know what can happen\'97if you go for treatment sooner, the better you will recover from Ebola. I worked from county to county talking to people, meeting with the chief, meeting with stakeholder to talk to them about Ebola, every community to talk to them about Ebola.  I think we\'92re four survivors on our team.\
I was the first nurse that survived.\
Q: Wow.\
KSB: Yes, the first nurse that survived. So that\'92s when the Ministry said, \'93Wow, then you can help us.\'94 And then a few other people, NGOs [non-governmental organization] said the same thing. They started coming around and then I started giving them my story and then we used to go from place to place talking to people, \'93You can survive.\'94 At that time, they wanted us to pray. People were just dying. No control. People just dying. So, there after I started going from community to community, from county to county talking to people, and they listened. I told them, \'93You can make it. The sooner you go, they will provide medication for you, but it is not for Ebola. It\'92s just there to support you and help.\'94 So, we started going from place to place, counseling people that you can go there, you can survive Ebola, and then so on.\
Q: And the reason you contracted the Ebola was because you are in contact with the patients whom you were nursing?\
KSB: Yes, yes.\
Q: Both of whom you didn\'92t know that they were Ebola cases?.\
KSB: No one knew that Ebola is very fast. When a person dies, that\'92s when the virus spreads. Well, no one knew that message. The Ministry of Health, where I am now, is responsible for developing a health intervention message. So that\'92s why we changed the message because when a person died from Ebola and then you\'92re there, you will contract the virus quickly because the virus immediately transfers from the deceased to you. So the message changed. At that time, we only knew one message\'97headache, fever, and you will do this, this and that will happen to you. But after I came from the unit, the Ministry of Health changed that whole message that they shouldn\'92t touch a dead body. The dead body of an Ebola patient is dangerous. If someone died in your community, don\'92t touch the body.\
Q: And it seemed most of the people still didn\'92t know about this risk of Ebola.\
KSB: No. At that time, the risk of Ebola really that no one knew.  Or they knew, but they were in a denial stage about whether it was true, this sickness can really kill. People already knew the trauma I went through, but they just felt that the Ministry of Health was lying.\
And then the Muslim people, you know, before when someone died, they will wash the body too. Well, in one place in the far country, they did that. When the imam died, they went and bathed the imam too. All of those that bathed that imam, those men died. They died. So people started to believe, believe that when someone died, don\'92t touch their body. The body is very dangerous. That\'92s how the whole message changed on Ebola. The body is a danger.\
Q: Your story is unbelievable\'97that you\'92re sitting here today alive and you\'92re trying to help other people to survive by saying, \'93You know you can actually make it.\'94 And you did it. After you were discharged, how did other people behave towards you?\
KSB: It was bad.  I was stigmatized. But my husband at that time and my family, they really supported me. You will have other friends that will stigmatize you, but when your family really supports you, you will not have time for anybody. I just asked myself, if God can make me survive Ebola, then I will not take anybody stigmatizing me.  I prayed to God, let me do what I can do for a lot of people to survive Ebola. I went on the radio station, talked to people about Ebola from radio station to another radio station and telling my story and then people were listening and taking my advice. So, even friends I knew that we used to eat together, do everything together, they went away from me. But, my family supported me, the division I\'92m working with in the Ministry of Health supported me, and the hospital I worked with, other nurses all supported me. They did well for me, and they did not stigmatize me. Although other people stigmatized me, I think people there loved me at that time. They really supported me in the process.\
\
}
