Q: We are here to hear your story about exactly what happened during the Ebola epidemic. What is your background? \
HN: I\'92m a nurse. I\'92m a SCCHM, what we call a certificate in nursing. I did my SRN [State Registered Nurse], which is an RN [Registered Nurse] diploma. I did my BS [Bachelor of Science] in nursing. I\'92m now doing an MPA, master\'92s in public health.\
Q: What made you become a nurse? Do you like it?\
HN: It\'92s a passion. In terms of care, my mom was not really a nurse, but she was a nurse at home. I saw all what she was going through. I decided that\'92s a good passion, for nursing, not going into another field, the commercial world, be a banker, make fast money. But I want to serve humanity. That\'92s really what made me to go into nursing, serving humanity.\
Q: When Ebola happened and when it was confirmed again on the 24 of May, 2014, how did you get engaged in it?\
HN: We were the first volunteers to be trained by the WHO [World Health Organization], intensive training for two weeks. We had the first treatment center open at Hastings; I was deployed there, and I was in charge of nineteen nurses but only three or four stood the test of time.\
Q: What were you trained in? What was the training about?\
HN: The training was all about handling of EVD [phonetic] patients. There was no treatment regimen. What they told us is that if the person is having diarrhea or vomiting, you give that person ORS, oral rehydration salts. Because you have to replenish the hydration, definitely. And Paracetamol. Those were the only treatments we had at first.\
Q: So, what exactly were your roles? What were you doing, the nurses who were there?\
HN: I was the charge nurse, not only in nursing percent of the ward. I was doing training, relocating nurses by ward. Definitely you don\'92t go in [one] by one, you go in by pairs, because mistakes may happen. When gowning, when you are removing your PPE, your next best colleague would be there watching you for any mistakes done. I was making sure that the place was really running smooth. That was Hastings 1 which was PTS1 [PTS1 Ebola Treatment Center, Hastings, Freetown, Sierra Leone]\
Q: It was PTS1?\
HN: PTS1. But then it was PTS, Police Training School Treatment Center, only.\
Q: So, when the cases started arriving in numbers, how did you manage it?\
HN: It was not easy. The first point of contact was triage, female wards, male wards. All we were giving, as I said before, was treating for the fever, and also the dehydration, and give them food. Their family foods were coming in. So, they have their three days meals, in the morning they have tea.\
In a week or two weeks, I wasn\'92t doing the tracking, I was like a PR Officer for the center. We admitted over a hundred cases and, trust me, over sixty percent of those cases died. Yes, I can still remember. Over sixty percent of those cases passed out, they passed out. But I had a very strong team at that time, and we are a team with the military. I said, \'93You know what? It\'92s not in our protocol to treat. But let\'92s go back to the blackboard and see how we can change some things.\'94 Because these people were coming in with EVD. But if you can treat the underlying causes, you can really sustain a level of this person. We got all the drugs we needed, anti-malaria, antibiotics. We need to start having survivors. And that\'92s how we were able to have survivors.\
Q: So, as the one in charge, how were you mobilizing your people?\
HN: If the workers are seeing you working, definitely they will follow your footsteps. If I sit behind giving orders, they will never. So, I make sure that we go in together. We do what we have to do together.\
I can still remember I had the first fever. [laughs] Working in the treatment center, not a holding center, my temperature shoots up. I called my doctor in charge at that time, Dr. Satalikas [phonetic]. I say, \'93Doc, I think I have it.\'94 He said, \'93No, you don\'92t.\'94 I said, \'93Doc, no, I\'92m serious.\'94 He said, \'93No, you don\'92t. Go into your billet.\'94 Because they gave us an area to rest, when you are tired, you have to go and rest. That was the whole treatment, no tests done. No anti-malaria, antibiotics overdose. I went home, fever. My son went to come closer to me, I told my wife, \'93No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Don\'92t even touch me, please.\'94 I was shivering. I did not sleep on the bed.\'94 I slept on the floor. Waking up in the morning, I had to go to the hospital, but all my blankets, have to put it in water, give it enough chlorine, and I went home. I went again to work. Because I don\'92t want people saying, if we have any fever, automatically - the logic was, as long as you\'92re a healthcare worker, you\'92re working a treatment center, the chances of you having it was great. That\'92s the thinking. And the case definition is temperature high up. And have the other signs to look for, and also, where are you coming from? So knowing that, for example, with my son, having a  high fever. The father is working in a treatment center. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Push this boy away. Automatically, he had gotten it from the father. Even if it is negative and said, no, let us still observe.\
Q: So, did the fever subside?\
HN: Definitely. By antimalarials, by antibiotics. [laughs] It subsided, it subsided.\
Q: What were the things that you learned from this experience? Things that you\'92d want us to remember and to continue with them, and things that would you would also want to remember that we wished we had done them better. What were some of the successes?\
HN: Yes, we had successes, yes. For Sierra Leone, if my memory serves me well we had about 8,704 infected victim positive cases.\
Q: Eight thousand?\
HN: 704. Of that 8,704, 3,589 passed away. 3,589 passed away. We had our first case on the 24 of May, 2014, and the WHO declared Ebola really over in Sierra Leone on the 7 of November, 2015. Some of us were saying after the outbreak, Sierra Leone is not the first country to have Ebola. Congo had it, and Ebola came from the name of the river in Congo. But people didn\'92t have much idea about how the virus can mutate. The information given at first sight was the previous information based on what they saw happen in Congo. So, some of the lessons learned is about communication during outbreaks. We were not prepared for outbreaks to occur. The first people you should take into consideration before it spreads are the community members.\
Some of the lessons learned were that our problems or our mistakes that we made were because the message was not well filtered-down. And, because it was not well filtered-down, then here we\'92ve got that higher probability [of the virus spreading]. Never mind that it was our first experience. Then, the training geared, the first training was really telling  about the \'93no touch\'94 procedure, but we don\'92t teach signs and symptoms. But, in person, we got better by using our own immune system, fighting the virus.\
Q: So, if it happens again, for example, or any type of epidemic, what advice would you have, for example for the government, in terms of preparedness? What should we be having in place to effectively manage?\
HN: The structures should be well equipped. It\'92s only through the outbreak we even knew what is IPC [infection prevention and control], washing of hands. And even right now, as I\'92m talking to you, they don\'92t even always use these gloves. So, they only obey [procedures] during the Ebola outbreak. I can work in the ward, and they are giving you a limited supply of gloves. So, when I say structure, I\'92m talking about resources in total. We have young brains here that you can send to some courses, they come back and be well prepared for any emergency coming up. Two weeks, even in one training on EVD [phonetic] is not enough for you to work in a treatment center.\
But we did it out of humanity, because we wanted to fight. Some of these things are the things that the government should put in place. And also recognizing the work that people did. Some of us, we worked throughout, like my other brother told me, \'93Haurace, why are you working?\'94 I said, \'93You can feed me, but you cannot feed me forever. I have my own family to take care of. You expect me to sit at home begging you?\'94 No.\
I want my voice to be heard; I want to be recognized that I was one of the fighters. But these medals were not given to people like us, like nurses, never. But people were given medals that didn\'92t even touch an Ebola patient. I\'92m talking from the general perspective here. People got called on state television, given medals that never went into a treatment center.  What about those that died at the treatment center. How are you encouraging them also? So, I say it\'92s not enough. They will be using us like guinea pigs working for them.\
HN: When you promise people, when you promise people, do something about it. The thing is some of them died. We lost 221, that\'92s what the record had that we had lost. 221, in fact, we lost over 500.\
Q: That\'92s what you think?\
HN: As I already said, I got into medicine because I love nursing. They recognize the eleven doctors that we lost in this country, but they don\'92t recognize how many nurses we lost in this country.\
Q: They didn\'92t?\
HN: None. You can go and Google how many doctors lost. But type how many nurses and see if there\'92s how many?\
Q: How many doctors did we lose?\
HN: In total, we lost something like eleven, counting the bodies. Eleven or ten, because we only had one survivor, who I was also working with, who is Dr. Samubria [phonetic]. I worked with him until he got the infection. We did the discharge together. So, when they told me that he is infected, I say, \'93Well, he\'92s a doctor. If he was infected, I\'92m infected, too.\'94 In a sense being that, again, the laboratories, not only having the lab doing this. But some of the lab results are mistakes. A lot of people died, but not [because of] Ebola.\
Q: It was something different?\
HN: The results came out positive. But a lot of people really had different symptoms, like I said. Being a witness I cannot say anything much. I have a case, it\'92s just a case, I have a case. The test results waited for the patient, I saw the test results waiting for the patient, came positive. I said, \'93No. This person doesn\'92t look like somebody who\'92s positive. Never mind there is fever. Let\'92s treat with antibiotics and give our first line treatment. We sent out, I know, five different specimens from the same individual, with five different names from that same individual.\
After two weeks of treatment, we sent five specimens from the same individual, five different names. Three came negative, two came positive. So, how can you interpret that? I was expecting maybe three negative, the other two should be negative, but when it was two positive, the other three should be positive. So having two results. So, if in the case of the doctor I told you, my doctor, Dr. Martin Salia, his whole house was quarantined. Even the person that was a caretaker that was closer to him who is his body. She never got the infection. But she was the one giving him the treatment when he put him in the billet. Was taking care of him doing everything for him. But our result was negative. But they said, \'93Doctor, it\'92s a virus.\'94 And the second result was positive. And the quarantine house, she\'92s my colleague. Up today she\'92s there, she\'92s never positive.\
Some of these things, the explanation, the tests, these other things. It\'92s different. Sometimes we can see the patients. We have some cases, people go and give them HIV positive, go to other places, they say they are HIV negative. Yes, I\'92ve seen it. And what will we say to the patients?  Oh the reagent. That\'92s just what you put up, blame cast on. But let\'92s look at the beyond, not jumping into conclusions. The message to pass on, and what people are seeing, is two different things.\
Q: But, you see, what I\'92m learning from this, Haurace, is the critical role of a nurse, as the people who really know about the patient. We are not saying other health workers have a minor role to play. But the fact that you were there twenty-four hours, doing all these things, and the example that you have just given about the differences. And some of the initiatives that you studied, and treatments, I think maybe some of these interviews are really key for people to know that we really have a critical role to play in the delivery of healthcare services.\
HN: I hope that. At our center, like I say again, we are nurses in outside life. But again, it\'92s our system. We are going to need a change. They did a whole documentary of Hastings Ebola treatment center, after doing our third discharge, which was--at that time--our highest discharge which was just for two patients. They showed the nurses that fought Ebola. Nurses like us, you can\'92t believe. All, of course, we are there. I saw other colleagues, the nurses were not there. I saw the doctors and others maybe. So, do you know how you feel sometimes? Why did I really do nursing? But again, I always sit down and said, \'93I have something in me that I want to portray.\'94\
A single individual can change a system, if only you stand firm to change the system. That\'92s what I always say. I\'92m telling you on the front point, not because I want an interview, trust me. I served, but our problem we have here is some careers in government are not respected, trust me. Nurses, we know the patient more than all over health care professionals. Nurses, we are with the patients twenty-four seven.\
So, one doctor, he called me only once, I said, \'93I\'92m here to see\'97.\'94 And then it\'92s maybe it\'92s two, three days before that doctor comes back. That nurse can only go to the pharmacist when he or she is discharged and wants to buy medicine. But the nurses goes there to buy drugs. So you have to give you prescriptions, or the patient\'92s relative goes and buys from the pharmacist. That nurse can only go to the lab technician or the phlebotomist, when that lab technician had to come and take samples. But you are the nurse, you are there twenty-four seven. But I say, \'93Have you taken your medicine? Okay, please take two. Look at these, take a glass of water.\'94 You are doing bedside, you are with a patient, but your role is not respected. It\'92s pathetic, really. We just pray that with your assistance, that things will change. That\'92s all we are praying for.\
\
}
