Q: Where were you when the Ebola outbreak began and how long have you been working as a nurse midwife?\
WF: I have been a midwife for twenty-one years. Let me clarify that I\'92ve also been the president the Liberia Midwives Association since 2017. During the Ebola years I worked as a midwife, too. \
I personally worked at the Duport Road Health Center at that time.  It was not an Ebola unit, but it catered to the health needs of the community, especially pregnant women because during the Ebola, most of the health centers and hospitals were closed to patients. Duport Road, the facility remained open and we midwives were to work throughout.\
It was challenging, too, because at a certain point in time there were no materials to work with so we had to step back and wait for materials to come. We went through a series of workshops, where we were taught infection prevention control techniques where you have to be fully attired when playing with body fluids. So, being a midwife, I knew that those were all things that would put a person at risk for Ebola. But in as much as those were steps that we needed to follow, we still needed to save lives. So, we did not \uc0\u822  I did not stay away. \
Q: Did some of the midwives become infected?\
WF: We had a colleague caring for a pregnant woman, and she became positive. And then another one who was caring for a patient also became positive and died. It was scary. It was difficult for us as midwives hearing that our colleagues are also caring for patients and they have also become victims of this Ebola virus. So, it was difficult for us and it was also difficult for family members, especially the midwife who died. She was well-known in her community. She cared so much for pregnant women and even for clients who came across her and in the process of caring, and she became infected. \
So, it was kind of difficult and it was scary knowing that your colleague was providing care and she came down with the virus. So, you see yourself every day, as you leave your house, you feel that\'97it was like when I was leaving my house, I felt like I was going on the battlefront. If I\'92m not fortunate I could get positive from caring for patients. So, it was kind of traumatizing for us who were working during that Ebola season.\
Q: Was there any guidance given to you how to be safe? You say you did training \'97\
WF: Yes, we did training. We were trained on this SQS [Safe and Quality Services]. And the organization that trained us, we had M\'e9dicins du Monde.\
Q: M\'e9dicins du Monde?\
WF: Yes, they were the ones who provided training for us at our facility on how to care for the patient, how to use this PPE [Personal Protective Equipment] and how to remove it. And it wasn\'92t just one training, it was like a sequence. Every other week you would have one or two persons coming to talk with you, to talk with the staff that was working, and give you updates on changes or on new findings. That was how we got knowledge on how to use preventive measures and even how to evaluate if a patient has Ebola, the signs and symptoms, too. It was continuous and a process. You get on the radio, you hear it. We had organizations coming every nine, ten, sometimes every other week to give updates and encouragement. And then at close to the end of the\'97not the end of the Ebola\'97around August, September, the Midwifery Association leadership also took the lead to go to these facilities who had midwives working to encourage them and also to continue to remind them to take preventive measures while caring for their patients.\
Q: Just tell me a bit about your life. I can see your passion in what you did. How did you want to become a midwife?  And your education, your family. Are there any mentors in your life that really motivated you to be who you are?\
WF: Yes. I had an aunt who was a midwife.\
My mother\'92s younger sister. She was a midwife. And it was because of her that I developed that passion of becoming a midwife even when I was out of grade school, going into the end of my high school years. I admired her so much especially when she\'92s dressed and caring for these patients. And because of that she had a lot of friends. When she was walking in the community, this mother would come and run to her. \'93Oh, this is the lady who helped me when I was in labor.\'94 And you know, from there I started falling in love with this profession. \
I did not think about getting into the profession because there were riches in it. But I had a passion, that love for mothers, labor and delivery. \
When I was a kid, when I\'92d see a woman pregnant, I would feel that that lady is filled; she is not to eat. And sometimes when she\'92d go and put to birth, when she\'92d come back, she went and found this baby. Where did she find this fine baby? But I didn\'92t even know that she was carrying a child. But when I started having this knowledge that a child grows in an adult, within another adult. And then that person is the one that is to put that baby in this world. I thought, how can this happen? How should this happen? This must be a miracle. Even in my first month in midwifery school I was like going to the delivery room to see that process. And my first experience was like, \'93This is God\'92s wonder. It\'92s not man\'92s but God\'92s.\'94 Sorry if I\'92m talking about God, because I\'92m a Christian. \
Q: What did you use to protect yourself?\
WF: Gloves and then we used plastic bags. We use longer plastic bags. And we had the rain boots, a plastic apron, and masks. \
And when I went home\'97because as I said earlier, during the whole Ebola period while I was working at that facility, I told my family that I cannot stop. To be frank, when the Ebola intensified, my husband called me and said, \'93Your friends are not going to work. Why can\'92t you sit?\'94 Well, what I told him was, \'93If I sit in my home I can\'92t help anybody. We are going through training so we know how to prevent ourselves.\'94 But when I was leaving the facility going home, I was worried. Who are these patients I have interacted with? Are they positive? Or are they in the late incubation period where you don\'92t know that this person is positive? \
I had a child who in 2014 was just four years. How are you going to keep away from that child? Because as soon as I come home from work, \'93Mama is coming home!\'94 He\'92s going to rush to me and hold me tight. So when I got home, I would say, \'93When I come from work, nobody come around me. Stay away.\'94 But it was difficult because those were our kids. When you are sitting as a mother, that child will come unknowingly, come and rub on you. It was difficult. But we did what we could do.\
Q: So, is there anything that stands out about what you used to do before Ebola and what you\'92re doing now?\
WF: Before the Ebola, to be frank, as a health worker during our course of study before getting to become a professional, we knew that you had to take universal precautions. But we actually did not observe those precautions at many times when we were doing procedures--hand-washing\'97before you touch your patient, wash your hands; after you touch this patient, wash your hands, in between patients, wash your hands\'97it was not so before the Ebola. It was like the Ebola virus disease was terrible, but it was also an eye-opener to us health workers that no matter the circumstances, you need to take these preventive measures whenever you are coming in contact with your patient or client. And so, it taught us a lesson that there are conditions or there are instances where you should not overlook anything. Do not leave out universal precautions. Do not leave out these infection prevention control and protocol. It also taught us that even in the process of caring for a patient, you could transfer a disease from one patient to another. So, it taught me a great lesson\'97\
Q: \'97Do you think these habits\'97\
WF: But what I\'92m seeing now, it\'92s going down again. It\'92s like we are going back to our pre-Ebola stage where infection prevention, where we knew about it, but were not observing it. I\'92m not in a health facility anymore. I\'92m with the school. But when I go to the hospital for supervision, the buckets are there, but since when was this water changed? It\'92s just there. And sometimes in some facilities you don\'92t even see soap any longer. You don\'92t see hand sanitizer any longer. We are going back. We are forgetting again. From my own observation, that\'92s what I\'92m seeing. \
Q: What are the five things or three things that you can tell that you\'92ve learned about the \
Ebola crisis?\
WF:The Ebola crisis taught us a great lesson. And one of the lessons that I learned from that was to always take precautions when you are caring for a client. Do not overlook any case. \
And another lesson that I was taught was that there should always be materials available because if materials are not available, you are going to put yourself at risk and you will end up dying from preventable diseases. Like we have colleagues who were victims, and these colleagues were caring for patients who they felt that never had this Ebola. Maybe one way or the other, maybe by mistake, they got infected from that patient. So, we should always remember that every case that we interact with remember that you need to continue your IPC protocol.\
Another lesson, or one last negative part, is we tend to forget too soon. When things are no more, we feel that all is well. Instead of being proactive, we most of time become retroactive. That is, we know that you need to take your IPC measures at all times. Do not wait for a situation to come before you say, \'93Oh, let me take IPC measures.\'94 It could be too late. You could be infected already. So, instead of just waiting for Ebola outbreak or another outbreak before we know that we as health workers should take precautions. That, for me, it\'92s not a good practice for us health workers in Liberia. And we need to learn from that. We need to learn from the Ebola episode.\
Whenever I\'92m giving health education\'97because most of the time this mentorship program is that you only teach when you meet with your colleague, you mentor them and you teach them\'97when I\'92m mentoring them I\'92m always reminding them that we should not wait for a situation to take action. We should always prepare for it. That is, always observe your IPC measures. So, that\'92s one lesson that I have learned. And this lesson I have made it my business or my regular practice to always tell my midwives or even other health workers that always observe IPC. Do not leave it out, because we as health workers were victims of being forgetful. That\'92s how we were highly hit.\
Q:  Women were involved in the health education?\
WF: Women were committed. Women were involved. Even the younger girls in the community were involved with the health education, going from house to house educating people.\
Q: And how about the men?\
WF: Men [laughs], the men, too. But mostly you\'92d see the women and the youth, those younger boys and girls involved going from house to house. They were the community mobilizers informing people about preventive measures. In my community almost every house had this bucket. This Ebola bucket where we had water. You had bleach in the water. When you are entering my house, you have to wash your hands. When you are leaving, you have to wash your hands. Every house had those buckets sitting right at the door.\
Q: In your work, you are working with other nurses from other institutions or organizations, some national and international. How was it to work with them?\
WF:It was not difficult to work with them because everyone was working towards one common goal: prevention. Save yourself. This SQS [Safe and Quality Service training] is save first you, your clients, and your family members. So, save all. So, the goal was always use the preventive measure. Do not be the one to transmit the virus to another person. So, we all worked together as one team. Like, even in the facility when we have a case like a pregnant woman comes, everyone showed concern. We would remind each other when we are doing procedures, \'93Have you done this? Do this. Do this step, do not forget this step.\'94 So, it was like you remind me, I remind you, and we work together to save the life of the client.\
Q: Is there anything that could be done differently?\
WF: I don\'92t think there\'92s anything to be done differently in terms of IPC. But what we need to do is something that we already have the knowledge of. And the knowledge should always be implemented at the facility level. \
Not only at the facility level but at the community level, because I assume that Liberians have forgotten. Yes, because if a child is sick, as soon as I see my child is sick, another person is coming. \'93Oh, this child has a fever.\'94 He used his same bare hand to touch the child. So, we have forgotten. Ebola is gone and everything is gone.\
But for the health worker\'97for us, the health practitioner\'97we should be the ones to continue to remind the community constantly about this IPC protocol. Preventing at your community level, this is what you do to prevent the spread of disease.\
Q: And how about the communities themselves? [laughter]\
WF: The communities themselves, as I said, community leaders need to also be reminded to continue what they were doing during the Ebola. It\'92s not only about just since Ebola is gone everything is over and let\'92s go back to our same business as usual. We should continue to carry out our activity during Ebola and even after Ebola, continue what was done during the Ebola that to helped us fight Ebola. And at the facility level, for us that are in leadership positions, we should make sure to have those materials that will make our health practitioners or our police to carry out these IPC protocols.\
}
