 Q: Why did you become a nurse and midwife? What made you, growing up, decide to do this?\
CTL: I wanted to be a nurse, but I decided to do midwifery first as a stepping-stone, and after practicing, went back to school to do the RN [registered nurse]. And presently, I\'92m RNCM.\
Q: Where did you grow up? Can you tell me a little bit about the community that you grew up in?\
CTL: I grew up in Montserrado. I lived with both parents. I came from a Muslim background. I have one sister, two brothers. I am the last. Presently, I\'92m married. I have one child.\
Q: One child. Congratulations. Where did you get encouragement that you as a young girl, becoming a woman, could do what you\'92re currently doing?\
CTL: I was about eight. My mother\'92s younger sister was a nurse midwife. She had a shop where she used to sit after work treating the babies. I would visit her there. By the age of ten or eleven I acted as if doing what she did was my intention. I adore babies. That\'92s where I have my passion. And from there I grew up, but just prior to the war, things changed. I really wanted to become a medical doctor, but unfortunately, when I took the test to go to school, there was no money. We were heartbroken.\
Q: Constance, can you tell me when you first heard the words Ebola viral disease?\
Lumeh: My experience of it is 2014, 2014 June to July mainly.\
Q: And what happened then in that time?\
CLT: Everyone was afraid. People were running away from jobs.  It was not easy.\
Q: So who taught you how to protect yourself? How did you learn that?\
CLT: WHO [World Health Organization] would send people to teach how to wear the PPE, how to take it off, how to spray. All the people started listening to them. It really helped because you could get infected taking off the material.\
Q: Can you talk a little bit about how\'97what is\'97tell me about the tradition of how people are buried here in Liberia, before Ebola. What happens when someone dies? What does the family do?\
CLT: Before Ebola, if somebody from my religion died you have to bathe the person. Then what they\'92re supposed to do is turn to other people to bury them. We will come, have ceremonials, lots of things. Then at the end, we cook food or eat together. That used to happen prior to Ebola. And even initially when Ebola entered, they were still doing it because it was like a denial stage. Everyone was saying they\'92re lying. They take money from people. They want to bring diseases. Just lying.\
Q: So how did Ebola change this?  It stopped what you normally did, right, the epidemic? You couldn\'92t bury people in the way that you had before.\
CLT: When the Ebola came, after a time, they decided to burn people. They used to burn people.\
Q: Did many nurses die?\
CLT: From our facility, yes, died. We lost four doctors in one team.\
Q: Did you think you were going to die?\
CLT: Did I think that I was going to die? Yes. Just like in the morning before you go, you have to pray. You enter. You pray. But just everybody wanted to pray first for themselves. You come home, your wash your skin with triple antibiotic. No places are safe.\
Q: What did you learn the most about what worked, what were good things that nurses could do, and what you would have liked more of? To prepare for another epidemic, right\'97\
CLT: And I pray for it. But if, yes.\
Q: Yes. What do you want for nurses? What would you want to say to nurses in another country, or facing an epidemic? What would you tell them? What would you advise them to do?\
CLT: The best people to fight the epidemic are from your country because you\
have knowledge of your system. If you are not from that country some people will not trust you, \'93I\'92m from Togo, not from Liberia\'94.  But you do what you do because you are there to save humanity. Nurses, they\'92re saving humanity. That\'92s my passion.}
