---
layout: page
title: Reflections
permalink: /reflections/
---

## Jennifer Dohrn

When I learned about the growing outbreaks of Ebola in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea in 2014-2016, I immediately wanted to know about the nurses and midwives. Were they safe? Did they have personal protective equipment?  How could I help?  Having traveled this journey with nurses and midwives in South Africa in the early 2000s as they rallied and immersed themselves in caring for their communities ravaged by HIV, I wanted to connect and be with them in solidarity.  I organized my teaching with a timeline of what was happening week by week on the frontlines to keep students engaged and learn about pandemic response. Five years later I traveled to Sierra Leone and Liberia so that I could hear their stories, look nurses and midwives in their eyes and say, ‘You and your work mattered!’  I listened as they told me about their heartbreaks and victories, and their relentless determination to keep caring for their colleagues and their communities.  We cried together and acknowledged each other.  Now their stories will be heard around the world, and their wisdom and leadership are guiding us on how we respond to this COVID-19 pandemic.  I say their names and carry them in my heart as I fight for a just and equitable world.

## Victoria Rosner

When this project was first conceived, I was dubious that I could have a meaningful role.  What could an English professor like me possibly contribute to understanding pandemic response?  What I came to learn is that the nurses we worked with were dealing with a communications problem – which is the kind of problem I could get my head around. The nurses were doing a phenomenal job – driving innovation with scant resources, showing immense bravery in the face of great danger, and going far beyond the scope of their duties to steer communities to safer practices.  Yet they were receiving little recognition, and their knowledge was missing the broader audience it deserved.  I am not a nurse or a policymaker, but I thought maybe I could help bridge the communications gap, help to shape and share the nurses’ stories.

From the very first I felt very lucky to be able to contribute to this effort, and over time I have come to understand that those of us with training in language and story-telling can really help to influence whose stories get told, and when, and how.  It’s been an extraordinary privilege for me to be part of this work.  Though I still apologetically introduce myself as “the English professor” when we talk about it in public. 

## Annette Mwansa Nkowane, RN, RM, BSc, MA

Giving back to my profession is what compelled me to participate in the work “on the frontline”. It is really an honor to be part of this valuable work. Every effort towards making the voices of nurses count is important as they are in the majority providing close to client services. Travelling to Liberia and Sierra Leone to record  oral histories was an opportunity for me to get first-hand accounts of nurses’ experiences during the Ebola outbreak. When I listened to their experiences, I got a deeper understanding of what it means to be at the frontline, which is a rare opportunity. It was my desire to help make the silent voices be heard with the hope of galvanizing support for them and other nurses working in similar contexts. I believe that all our efforts helped to bring about healing of hidden emotional scars which resulted from their experiences and opens a way for constructive actions on improving the conditions of nurses on the frontlines.

## Margaret Phiri

In 2013, I was in Liberia working with the nursing and midwifery professions to strengthen their regulatory systems.  From 2015 – 2017,  I was working in Sierra Leone as an Advisor for the World Health Organization’s Maternal Newborn Health program to support the recovery process from the toll the Ebola epidemic took on the country, its people and the health care system.  Returning to Liberia and Sierra Leone in 2019 to participate in gathering oral histories of the nurses and midwives who provided care under such challenging times was for me many things.  It was indeed a lifetime opportunity to document their shared lived experiences which will be part of their history and contribute to their national and global recognition. It gave me an opportunity to reflect together with colleagues whom we shared a painful past and rejoice together the unforgettable contributions they made towards the survival of the people in their countries.  And hearing from them how much my modest contributions did in fact help in their professional growth and development was very moving for me. My two year experience in Sierra Leone was special. I was there at a time when nursing professional colleagues didn’t know what to do better for their lives and those of their families. When I returned in 2019, it was a situation of hope and determination. My colleagues from both Sierra Leone and Liberia taught me a lesson of never to give up because what you know best is saving mankind. 

